Ted Audio Collective It's Ted Talks Daily, I'm your host, 
Elise Hugh. Change is scary, especially the unexpected kind. But 
cognitive scientist Maya Shankar finds that life's curveballs can be 
expansive. In her talk from Ted 2023, she shares a 
framework to think about change that opens up possibility and 
growth after the break. It's easy to know you want 
to make a change in your life, but it is 
hard to actually do it. How to be a better 
human from Ted is a podcast for when self-help feels 
too daunting or maybe even unrealistic or just not for 
you. I'm Chris Duffy, the host of How to Be 
a Better Human, and trust me, I do not have 
it all figured out. But join me as I talk 
to experts about actually attainable ways we can try to 
improve our lives. Whether it's facing fears, setting boundaries, cleaning 
your house without feeling like a failure or all sorts 
of other topics. Find How to be a Better Human 
wherever you get your podcasts. When I was a kid, 
the violin was the center of my life. I'd run 
home from the bus stop after school and practice for 
hours. Every Saturday, my mom and I would wake up 
at four in the morning to catch a train to 
New York so I could study a Juilliard. And as 
a teenager, my musical idol, It's Sock Pearlman, invited me 
to be his private student. And my big dream of 
becoming a concert violinist felt within reach. But then, one 
morning when I was 15, I was practicing this tricky 
technical passage. I struggled to get it right and I 
overextended my finger on a single note. I heard a 
popping sound. I'd permanently damage the tendons in my hand 
and my dream was over. I share this story because 
unexpected change happens to all of us. An accident or 
an illness, a relationship that suddenly ends. Today I'm not 
a violinist but I'm a cognitive scientist. And I'm interested 
in how we respond to exactly this kind of change. 
I've spent the past two decades studying the science of 
human behavior. And today, I host a podcast called A 
Slight Change of Plans. Glad you guys like it. Before 
I interview people from all over the world about their 
life altering experiences. I started this podcast because change is 
scary for a lot of us. Am I right? For 
one, it is filled with uncertainty and we hate uncertainty. 
Research shows that we're more stressed when we're told we 
have a 50% chance of getting an electric shock than 
when we're told we have a 100% chance. It's a 
wild, right? I mean, we'd rather be sure that a 
bad thing is going to happen than to have to 
deal with any uncertainty. Change is also scary because it 
involves loss of some kind. By definition, we're departing from 
an old way of being and entering a new one. 
And when we experience a change that we wouldn't have 
chosen for ourselves, it's easy to feel that our lives 
are contracting, that were more limited than before. But when 
we take this perspective, we fail to account for an 
important fact. That when an unexpected change happens to us, 
it can also inspire lasting change within us. We become 
different people on the other side of change. What we're 
capable of, what we value and how we define ourselves. 
These things can all shift. And if we can learn 
to take close attention to these internal shifts, we may 
just find that rather than limiting us, change can actually 
expand us. All right, today I'm going to share with 
you three questions you can ask yourself. The next time 
life throws you that dreaded curveball. In the moment, I 
know it's so easy to focus on what you've lost. 
And so I'm really hoping that you can use these 
questions as tools to discover all that you might gain. 
All right, let's start with question number one. This is 
inspired by a conversation I had on my podcast with 
a woman named Christine Ha. And it's about our capabilities. 
Christine was 24 when a rare autoimmune disease left her 
permanently blind. At the time, she was learning to cook 
the Vietnamese dishes that she had loved in childhood. But 
now, cooking even simple meals was tough. She told me 
that her frustration peaked one day when she was making 
a peanut butter and jelly sandwich. She struggled to align 
the two slices of bread and sticky jelly dripped all 
over her hands and onto the counter. She threw the 
sandwich into the trash and she felt really defeated by 
the limited future that she imagined for herself. Since Christine 
lived alone though, she had no choice but to keep 
at it. She remembers her delight when she successfully cut 
an orange for the first time and when she scrambled 
an egg without burning it. As she spent more hours 
in the kitchen, she realized that cooking was far more 
multi-sensory than she had thought. While she couldn't see if 
the garlic had browned, she could rely on the smell 
and the sizzling sounds in the pan. But Christine also 
realized something bigger, something new was emerging within her. At 
the start of her vision loss, she had cooked just 
to get by. I mean, it was really just a 
practical thing. But now she was thrilled by the challenge 
of it all. She tackled harder and harder recipes over 
the years and eventually became the first ever blind contestant 
on the TV show MasterChef. And guess what? She won 
the entire damn thing. Christine's a rock star. She's an 
amazing, amazing person. This brings us to the first question 
that you can ask yourself the next time you face 
something unexpected. How might this change, change what you're capable 
of? When we predict how we'll respond to any given 
change, we tend to imagine what our present-day selves will 
be like in that new situation. Research by the psychologist 
Dan Gilbert shows that we greatly underestimate how much will 
change in the future. Even though we fully acknowledge we've 
changed considerably in the past, our psychology continually tricks us 
into believing that who we are right now in this 
very moment is the person that's here to stay. But 
the person meeting the challenges after an unexpected change will 
be different. You will be different. Today Christine is a 
world-renowned chef. She goes by the nickname the Blind Cook 
and she owns three restaurants in Texas. And importantly, she's 
really curious about what else she can achieve without vision. 
These days you can find her snowboarding and rock climbing 
on the weekends. Christine shared with me something that she 
could have never have imagined thinking before all this. But 
if given the choice today, she would choose not to 
have her vision restored. So she did tell me she'd 
like it back for a moment because she really wants 
to know what Justin Viva looks like. Alright, let's move 
on to the second question. This one is about our 
values and it's inspired by a conversation I had with 
a science journalist named Florence Williams. One evening about five 
years ago, Florence and her husband were hosting a dinner 
party for their friends. As she was preparing the salad, 
her husband handed her his phone so that she could 
read an email from her relative. But he'd mistakenly pulled 
up the wrong email. What Florence saw instead was a 
lengthy note from her husband confessing his love to another 
woman. I know. Florence's 25-year marriage came to an end 
and she told me that she was taken aback by 
the physical and emotional intensity of her heartbreak. She said 
it felt like she'd been plugged into a faulty electrical 
socket. Since Florence is a problem-solver by nature, she instinctively 
saw her heartbreak as a problem to solve and developed 
a year-long systematic plan to try and fix it. Florence 
tried a bunch of things. She took solo trips into 
the wilderness. She tried a range of experimental therapies. She 
even went to the Museum of Broken Relationships, which I 
promised is a thing. You name it, she tried it. 
But by the end of the year, none of these 
remedies had healed her broken heart. And so Florence had 
no choice but to entertain a new philosophy altogether. Maybe 
a broken heart was not a problem to solve, and 
maybe closure wasn't the answer. Research by the psychologist, Dacker 
Keltner, shows that when we reduce our need for what's 
called cognitive closure, the desire to arrive at clear and 
definitive answers, our capacity to feel joy and beauty expands. 
Florence told me that when she freed herself from this 
goal-oriented mindset, a mindset, by the way, that she had 
valued for so much of her life up until this 
point, she began to find unexpected delight in the unknown. 
This leads us to the second question you can ask 
yourself the next time you face something unexpected. How might 
this change, change, what you value? The unexpected implosion of 
Florence's marriage has permanently shifted the way that she sees 
her life, from a puzzle in need of solutions to 
a more serendipitous path of discovery. Now when Florence goes 
hiking, she's just as likely to sit still, feeling the 
breeze as she is to try and make the summit. 
She no longer makes five-year plans. And she's comfortable not 
knowing all the answers around her heartbreak. By the way, 
I was texting with Florence the other day, and she's 
currently in a very happy relationship. All right, now onto 
question number three. This one is about how we define 
ourselves. It's about our self-identities, and it comes from my 
personal story of change with the violin. When my injury 
took the violin away from me, I found myself grieving, 
not just the loss of the instrument, but also the 
loss of myself. For so long, the violin had defined 
me that without it, I wasn't sure who I was 
or who I could be. I felt stuck. I'd later 
learned that this phenomenon is known as identity paralysis. It 
happens to a lot of us when we face the 
unexpected. Who we think we are and what we're about 
is suddenly called into question. But I since realized that 
there was something different, something more stable that I could 
have anchored my identity to. And this brings us to 
that third and final question. How might this change? Change? 
How you define yourself? When I re-examined my relationship with 
the violin, I discovered that what I really missed wasn't 
the instrument itself, but the fact that music had given 
me a vehicle for connecting emotionally with others. I remember 
as a little kid playing for people and feeling kind 
of awestruck that we might all feel something new together. 
What this means for me today is that I no 
longer anchor my identity to specific pursuits, like being a 
violinist or a cognitive scientist or a podcaster. Instead, I 
anchor my identity to what lights me up about those 
pursuits, what really energizes me. And for me, it's a 
love of human connection and understanding. I now define myself 
not by what I do, but why I do it. 
Look, unexpected change comes for us all, whether we like 
it or not. And when it does, it can really 
suck. But I'm hoping that if we can stay open 
to how we might internally change, how we might expand, 
it can help us weather the storm. Life recently threw 
me a new slight change of plans. I've always wanted 
to be a mom that becoming one has been difficult, 
and my husband and I have had to navigate pregnancy 
losses and other heartbreaks over the years. And now I'm 
not sure what will happen. But I'm using these three 
questions to help me during this tough time. I'm asking 
myself how this unexpected challenge might change what I'm capable 
of, what I value, and how I define myself. I'm 
still figuring things out. But what I can tell you 
right now is that I'm imagining a future me who 
is expanding her definition of what it means to parent, 
who's perhaps finding what she craved from motherhood in other 
places. At a minimum, this exploration has allowed me to 
loosen my grip on the identity of mom just of 
it, and I found it freeing. I'm beginning to see 
change with more possibility, and I'm hoping you can too. 
Thank you so much. 