Ted Audio Collective. It's Ted Talks Daily. I'm your host, 
Elise Hugh. Change is scary, especially the unexpected kind. But 
cognitive scientist Maya Shankar finds that life's curveballs can be 
expansive. In her talk from Ted 2023, she shares a 
framework to think about change that opens up possibility and 
growth after the break. It's easy to know you want 
to make a change in your life. But it is 
hard to actually do it. How to be a better 
human from Ted is a podcast for when self-help feels 
too daunting or maybe even unrealistic or just not for 
you. I'm Chris Duffy, the host of How to Be 
a Better Human, and trust me, I do not have 
it all figured out. But join me as I talk 
to experts about actually attainable ways we can try to 
improve our lives. Whether it's facing fears, setting boundaries, cleaning 
your house without feeling like a failure or all sorts 
of other topics. Find how to be a better human 
wherever you get your podcasts. When I was a kid, 
the violin was the center of my life. I'd run 
home from the bus stop after school and practice for 
hours. Every Saturday, my mom and I would wake up 
at 4 in the morning to catch a train to 
New York, so I could study at Juilliard. When I 
was a teenager, my musical idol, Itsock Perlman invited me 
to be his private student, and my big dream of 
becoming a concert violinist felt within reach. But then, one 
morning when I was 15, I was practicing this tricky 
technical passage. I struggled to get it right and I 
overexcited my finger on a single note. I heard a 
popping sound. I'd permanently damage the tendons in my hand 
and my dream was over. I share this story because 
unexpected change happens to all of us. An accident or 
an illness, a relationship that suddenly ends. Today, I'm not 
a violinist, but I'm a cognitive scientist. And I'm interested 
in how we respond to exactly this kind of change. 
I've spent the past few decades studying the science of 
human behavior. And today, I host a podcast called a 
slight change of plans. Glad you guys like it. Where 
I interviewed people from all over the world about their 
life altering experiences. I started this podcast because it changed 
the scary for a lot of us. For one, it 
is filled with uncertainty. And we hate uncertainty. Research shows 
that we're more stressed when we're told we have a 
50% chance of getting an electric shock. Then when we're 
told we have a 100% chance. It's wild, right? I 
mean, we'd rather be sure that a bad thing is 
going to happen than to have to deal with any 
uncertainty. Changes also scary because it involves loss of some 
kind. By definition, we're departing from an old way of 
being and entering a new one. And when we experience 
a change that we wouldn't have chosen for ourselves, it's 
easy to feel that our lives are contracting, that we're 
more limited than before. But when we take this perspective, 
we fail to account for an important fact. That when 
an unexpected change happens to us, it can also inspire 
lasting change within us. We become different people on the 
other side of change. What we're capable of, what we 
value and how we define ourselves, these things can all 
shift. And if we can learn to take close attention 
to these internal shifts, we may just find that rather 
than limiting us, change can actually expand us. Alright, today 
I'm going to share with you three questions you can 
ask yourself. The next time life throws you that dreaded 
curveball. In the moment I know it's so easy to 
focus on what you've lost. And so I'm really hoping 
that you can use these questions as tools to discover 
all that you might gain. Alright, let's start with question 
number one. This is inspired by a conversation I had 
on my podcast with a woman named Christine Ha. And 
it's about our capabilities. Christine was 24 when a rare 
autoimmune disease left her permanently blind. At the time, she 
was learning to cook the Vietnamese dishes that she had 
loved and childhood. But now cooking even simple meals was 
tough. She told me that her frustration peaked one day 
when she was making a peanut butter and jelly sandwich. 
She struggled to align the two slices of bread and 
sticky jelly dripped all over her hands and onto the 
counter. She threw the sandwich into the trash. And she 
felt really defeated by the limited future that she imagined 
for herself. Since Christine lived alone though, she had no 
choice but to keep at it. She remembers her delight 
when she successfully cut an orange for the first time. 
And when she scrambled an egg without burning it. As 
she spent more hours in the kitchen, she realized that 
cooking was far more multisensory than she had thought. While 
she couldn't see if the garlic had browned, she could 
rely on the smell and the sizzling sounds in the 
pan. But Christine also realized something bigger. Something new was 
emerging with in her. At the start of her vision 
loss, she had cooked just to get by. I mean, 
it was really just a practical thing. But now she 
was thrilled by the challenge of it all. She tackled 
harder and harder recipes over the years. And eventually became 
the first ever blind contestant on the TV show Master 
Chef. And guess what? She won the entire dancing. For 
students are off star. She's an amazing, amazing person. This 
brings us to the first question that you can ask 
yourself. The next time you face something unexpected. How might 
this change change what you're capable of? When we predict 
how we'll respond to any given change, we tend to 
imagine what our present day selves will be like in 
that new situation. Research by the psychologist Dan Gilbert shows 
that we greatly underestimate how much will change in the 
future, even though we fully acknowledge we've changed considerably in 
the past. Our psychology continually tricks us into believing that 
who we are right now in this very moment is 
the person that's here to stay. But the person meeting 
the challenges after an unexpected change will be different. You 
will be different. Today Christine is a world-renowned chef. She 
goes by the nickname The Blind Cook and she owns 
three restaurants in Texas. And importantly, she's really curious about 
what else she can achieve without vision. These days you 
can find her snowboarding and rock climbing on the weekends. 
Christine shared with me something that she could have never 
have imagined thinking before all this. But if given the 
choice today, she would choose not to have her vision 
restored. So she did tell me she'd like it back 
for a moment because she really wants to know what 
Justin Bieber looks like. All right, let's move on to 
the second question. This one is about our values and 
it's inspired by a conversation I had with a science 
journalist named Florence Williams. One evening about five years ago, 
Florence at our husband were hosting a dinner party for 
their friends. As she was preparing the salad, her husband 
handed her his phone so that she could read an 
email from her relative. But he'd mistakenly pulled up the 
wrong email. What Florence's on stead was a lengthy note 
from her husband confessing his love to another woman. I 
know. Florence's 25-year marriage came to an end. And she 
told me that she was taken aback by the physical 
and emotional intensity of her heartbreak. She said it felt 
like she'd implugged into a faulty electrical socket. Since Florence 
is a problem-solvered by nature, she instinctively saw her heartbreak 
as a problem to solve and developed a year-long systematic 
plan to try and fix it. Florence tried a bunch 
of things. She took solo trips into the wilderness. She 
tried a range of experimental therapies. She even went to 
the museum of broken relationships, which I promise is the 
thing. You name it, she tried it. But by the 
end of the year, none of these remedies had healed 
her broken heart. And so Florence had no choice but 
to entertain a new philosophy altogether. Navy, a broken heart, 
was not a problem to solve, and maybe closure wasn't 
the answer. Research by this psychologist, Dacric Heltner, shows that 
when we reduce our need for what's called cognitive closure, 
the desire to arrive at clear and definitive answers. Our 
capacity to feel joy and beauty expands. Florence told me 
that when she freed herself from this goal-oriented mindset, a 
mindset by the way that she had valued for so 
much of her life up until this point. She'd be 
get to find unexpected delight in the unknown. This leads 
us to the second question you can ask yourself the 
next time you face something unexpected. How might this change 
change what you value? The unexpected implosion of Florence's marriage 
has permanently shifted the way that she sees her life. 
From a puzzle in need of solutions to a more 
serendipitous path of discovery. Now in Florence goes hiking, she's 
just as likely to sit still, feeling the breeze as 
she is to try and make the summit. She no 
longer makes five-year plans. And she's comfortable not knowing all 
the answers around her heartbreak. By the way, I was 
texting with Florence the other day, and she's currently in 
a very happy relationship. All right, now on to question 
number three, this one is about how we define ourselves. 
It's about our self-identities, and it comes to my personal 
story of change with the violin. When my injury took 
the violin away from me, I found myself grieving, not 
just the loss of the instrument, but also the loss 
of myself. For so long the violin had to find 
me that without it I wasn't sure who I was 
or who I could be. I felt stuck. I'd later 
learn that this phenomenon is known as identity paralysis. It 
happens to a lot of us when we face the 
unexpected. Who we think we are and what we're about 
is suddenly called into question. But I sensed realize that 
there was something different, something more stable that I could 
have anchored my identity to. And this brings us to 
that third and final question. How might this change change? 
How you define yourself? When I re-examine my relationship with 
the violin, I discovered that what I really missed wasn't 
the instrument itself. But the fact that music had given 
me a vehicle for connecting emotionally with others. I remember 
as a little kid playing for people and feeling kind 
of awestruck that we might all feel something new together. 
What this means for me today is that I no 
longer anchor my identity to specific pursuits. Like being a 
violinist or a cognitive scientist or a podcaster. Instead, I 
anchor my identity to what lights meet up about those 
pursuits. What really energizes me. And for me, it's a 
love of human connection and understanding. I now define myself 
not by what I do, but why I do it. 
Look, unispected change comes for us all whether we like 
it or not. And when it does, it can really 
suck. But I'm hoping that if we can stay open 
to how we might internally change, how we might expand, 
it can help us weather the storm. Life recently threw 
me a new slight change of plans. I've always wanted 
to be a mom that becoming one has been difficult. 
And my husband and I have had to navigate pregnancy 
losses and other heartbreaks over the years. And now I'm 
not sure what will happen. But I'm using these three 
questions to help me during this tough time. I'm asking 
myself how this unexpected challenge might change, what I'm capable 
of, what I value, and how I define myself. I'm 
still figuring things out. But what I can tell you 
right now is that I'm imagining a future me who 
is expanding her definition of what it means to parent. 
Who's perhaps finding what she crave from motherhood in other 
places. At a minimum, this exploration has allowed me to 
loosen my grip on the identity of mom, just a 
bit. And I found it freeing. I'm beginning to see 
change with more possibility. And I'm hoping you can too. 
Thank you so much. 